---
layout: notes
part: true
math: true
title: "Question Sheet"
---

## Vectors

### Important definitions

- **Span** of $$U$$: the set of all linear combinations of vectors in $$U$$. The span describes all points reachable by a linear combination of the vectors in $$U$$.
- **Subspace** of $$\mathbf{R}^{n}$$: this is a non-empty subset $$S$$ of $$\mathbf{R}^{n}$$ with properties that all vectors are **closed** under **addition and *scalar* multiplication**. This can be described as a vector space that is a **subset** of a larger vector space. Remember that the subspace is the **span** of its constituent vectors.
  - The **intersection** of a subspace is simply all the vectors that are shared by both.
  - Every subspace of $$\mathbf{R}^{n}$$ **contains the zero vector**
  - If $$U$$ is a non-empty, finite subset of $$\mathbf{R}^{n}$$ then the *span* of $$U$$ is a subspace of $$\mathbf{R}^{n}$$ and is called the subspace spanned or generated by $$U$$. This means you need to know what elements are in $$U$$ to define a 'subset' of this space by spanning the entire set of these vectors.
- **Basis**: If for a subspace $$S$$, all vectors $$s \in S$$ are **linearly independent** and they **span $$S$$**, you have a **basis** of a vector space.
  - *There cannot be more vectors in a basis than the dimension of the vector space they span.* It is not possible to have three vectors in a basis for $$\mathbf{R}^{2}$$; hence if you have this many vectors, then it is not a basis as one vector will be a linear combination of another before it.

#### Questions

- Express the vector $$a$$ as a linear combination of vectors $$(b_{1}, b_{2}, ..., b_{n})$$.
  - You want to find the solution for the simultaneous equation $$a=\alpha b_{1}+\beta b_{2} + ... + \gamma b_{n}$$, solving for the unknown terms.
- Determine if the set of vectors is linearly dependent.
  - If the set contains the zero vector then the set is automatically linearly dependent.
  - Any singleton set is linearly **independent**
  - Find out if any successive vectors in this set is a linear combination of the previous (linearly independent) vectors in the set.
- Determine if a set of vectors is linearly independent (**matrix method**).
  - Populate a matrix $$M$$ where each **column** of $$M$$ is one of the vectors from the set.
  - If the **determinant is non-zero** then this set is a **basis** as it is **linearly independent**.
- **Removing** a **linearly dependent** vector from the set of its predecessors.
  - Represent this vector as a linear combination of its predecessors.
  - If your values for $$\alpha, \beta, \gamma, ...$$ are all $$0$$ then this vector is linearly dependent from the predecessors.
- Show that the set $$S$$ is a subspace of $$\mathbf{R}^{n}$$. Find a basis for, and the dimension of, $$S$$.
  - Show that the subspace contains the **zero vector**.
  - Show that each vector in the set $$S$$ is **linearly independent** to find the vectors that will form a basis for $$\mathbf{R}^{n}$$.
- Form a basis for $$\mathbf{R}^n$$ from the set of vectors $$S$$.
  - Iterate through $$S$$ and remove any linearly dependent vectors as you go along; you may end up with different bases for the same subspace.
- Find the coordinates of a vector $$v$$ with respect to basis $$U$$ and basis $$W$$.
  - The coordinates of $$v$$ for *any* basis $$A$$ is simply the coefficients required to represent $$v$$ as a **linear combination** of the **basis vectors** $$a \in A$$.

## Matrices

### Basic arithmetic

- Multiply the two matrices $$M$$ and $$N$$
  - To matrices are only multipliable if the number of columns on $$M$$ is the same as the number of rows on $$N$$. 
    - Visualise this by taking a single row of $$M$$; rotate it 90 degrees; can you fit this inside the matrix $$N$$?
    - If this is not possible then you cannot multiply the two matrices, as you will not have enough values for the operation.
  - Sum the products of each element as you iteratively advance the **row** of $$M$$ and the **column** of $$N$$.
  - The number of row-$$M$$ and column-$$N$$ will determine where to put this sum-value in the new matrix. This can be seen as 'run-and-dive'.

### Various Operations

Take the following 2x2 matrix:
$$
A=
\begin{bmatrix}
a & b\\
c & d
\end{bmatrix}
$$

- **Determinant:** $$ad-bc$$

- **Inverse:** 
  $$
  A^{-1}=\frac{1}{det(A)}
  \begin{bmatrix}
  d & -b\\
  -c & a
  \end{bmatrix}
  $$
  

Take the following $$3*3$$ matrix:
$$
B=
\begin{bmatrix}
a & b & c\\
d & e & f\\
g & h & i
\end{bmatrix}
$$

- **Determinant:** Do the strike through method, I won't describe it here because I already know it. :P

- **Matrix of minors:** Replace each element $$a..i$$  with the minor for that row and column- basically if you were working out the determinant by expanding along that row.

- **Matrix of cofactors:** Multiply the values of the matrix of minors with the signs of the alternating pattern, $$[+, -, +, -, ...]$$ for the first row; the second row is a leftwards rotation of this pattern, and so are any further rows.

- **Adjoint matrix:** This is the **transpose** of the **matrix of cofactors**.

- **Inverse:**

  - $$
    B^{-1}=\frac{1}{det(B)}adj(A)
    $$

### Elementary Row Operations

If you have the matrix $$B$$ obtained from the matrix $$A$$ after any of the following operations, the determinant of said matrix is also impacted:

- **Scalar multiplication** of a row; $$\|B\|=\lambda \|A\|$$.
- **Interchanging** of two rows; $$\|B\|=-\|A\|$$.
- **Adding a multiple of one row to another**; the determinant does not change.

### Linear Transformations

- Verify that $$\mathbf{T}$$ is a linear transformation.

  - Check that $$\mathbf{T}(0)=0$$.
  - Check that $$\mathbf{T}(a+b)=\mathbf{T}(a)+\mathbf{T}(b)$$.
  - Check that $$\mathbf{T}(\lambda a)=\lambda\mathbf{T}(a)$$

- For the bases $$V, W$$ and the linear transformation $$\mathbf{T}$$, and a vector $$a$$ with respect to $$V$$, find the coordinates of $$\mathbf{T}(a)$$ with respect to $$W$$.

  - Find the values of $$\mathbf{T}(v), \forall v\in V$$. Represent these as **linear combinations** of the basis vectors of $$W$$.
  - For each of the vector results from the above, construct a **matrix of $$\mathbf{T}$$** by using each as a **column vector** for the matrix $$M$$.
  - $$M.(a)=A$$ where $$A$$ is the **column vector of coordinates for your answer**.
    - This is achieved because we can represent $$\mathbf{T}(a)$$ as $$M.(a)$$ where $$M$$ is the matrix that represents a linear transformation, and $$(a)$$ is the column vector of coordinates for our input to the transformation.

- Change the coordinates of vector $$a$$ from basis $$V$$ to basis $$W$$.

  - You can use a **transition matrix** $$M$$ to get from coordinates of $$a$$ in $$V$$ to coordinates of $$a$$ in $$W$$.

  - The **transition matrix** $$M$$ is made up of the **column vectors** of the ***basis vectors of $$V$$*** once they have been **converted** to the **basis of $$W$$**. 

  - Once you have this, you can find the coordinates of $$a$$ in terms of $$W$$ by the following expression:
    $$
    \begin{bmatrix}
    a_{1}^{W} \\
    a_{2}^{W} \\
    \| \\
    a_{n}^{W} 
    \end{bmatrix}
    = M
    \begin{bmatrix}
    a_{1}^{V} \\
    a_{2}^{V} \\
    \| \\
    a_{n}^{V} 
    \end{bmatrix}
    $$

### Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors

**Eigenvectors**, when multiplied by their **eigenvalues**, will **not change direction**. 

- Find the eigenvalues of the matrix $$A$$.

  - Remember that $$A-\lambda I$$ is the matrix we are focusing on.
  - We solve for $$\lambda$$ by solving $$\|A-\lambda I\|=0$$. Each solution is an eigenvalue of $$A$$.

- Find the eigenvectors of the matrix $$A$$.

  - Find the eigenvalues for $$A$$ with the above method.

  - **For each eigenvalue of $$A$$**:

    - Substitute the value of $$\lambda$$ into the matrix $$A-\lambda I$$. 

    - Solve the equation 
      $$
      (A-\lambda_{n}I)
      \begin{bmatrix}
      x \\
      y \\
      z 
      \end{bmatrix}=
      \begin{bmatrix}
      0 \\
      0 \\
      0 
      \end{bmatrix}
      $$

    - You will find a vector of the form $$(x,y,z) = (a\gamma, b\gamma, \gamma)$$. Set $$\gamma=1$$ and then form a column vector using the right-hand side. **Avoid a non-zero vector**.

    - This method (finding a kernel) is faster than solving the simultaneous equation.

- (Diagonalization) Find a diagonal matrix $$D$$ and an invertible matrix $$S$$ such that $$S^{-1}AS=D$$, where $$A$$ is a provided matrix.

  - Find the eigenvalues and corresponding eigenvectors of $$A$$.
  - Each diagonal element of $$D$$ is an eigenvalue; each **column vector** of $$S$$ is a corresponding eigenvector.
  - This yields the result that $$A=S^{-1}DS$$.



## Sequences

1. Does the sequence  $$a(n)$$ converge?
   - Take **subsequences** and show that they are not equal to one another
   - Suppose that the **sequence is bounded**, and **verify** that the bound holds $$\forall n$$
2. Show that if $$0 \leq r < 1$$ then the sequence $$r^{n}$$ converges. By considering the sequence $$r^{n+1}$$ deduce that $$r^{n} \rightarrow 0$$.and 
   - Show that $$r^{n}$$ is a decreasing sequence which is hence bounded (below)
   - Show that $$r^{n+1}=rr^{n} \rightarrow rl$$   and hence this property only holds when $$r < 1$$ if $$l=0$$.

## Recurrences

- Find a closed form for the terms of a sequence.
  - Form an equation in relation to the **terms of the sequence**. For example, the Fibonacci sequence can be written as $$F_{n} - F_{n-1} - F_{n-2}=0$$.
  - Form and solve the **auxiliary equation**.
    - if $$\lambda_{1} \neq \lambda_{2}, x_{n}=A\lambda^{n}_{1} + B\lambda^{n}_{2}$$ 
    - if $$\lambda_{1} = \lambda_{2}, x_{n}=A\lambda^{n}_{1} + Bn\lambda^{n}_{2}$$ 
  - If you have the **first terms of a sequence**, use this to work out the required terms $$A$$ and $$B$$.
- Solving a non-homogeneous recurrence
  - Use the above to **solve the homogeneous form of the equation** to find $$h(n)$$
  - Then solve the **particular solution** to find $$p(n)$$
    - For a form $$f(n)=an$$, try $$x_{n}=Cn+D$$. $$x_{n-1}=C(n-1)+D$$
  - The solution of the recurrence is given by $$x(n)=h(n)+p(n)$$

## Differentiation

- Show that a function $$f$$ is differentiable
  - Remember that $$f$$ is differentiable if the limit $$\lim_{x\rightarrow a}\frac{f(x)-f(a)}{x-a}$$, which is equivalent to  $$\lim_{h\rightarrow 0}\frac{f(a+h)-f(a)}{h}$$ exists.
  - You can prove this by showing two sides of an equation must be equal for a function (such as $$f(x)=\|x\|$$) to be differentiable.
  - You may also need to use induction on the equation for a function
- Find the partial derivatives of $$f(x,y,z,...)$$
  - Simply differentiate the expression whilst holding each of the variables $$x,y,z...$$ constant; i.e. only differentiate the variable you are focusing on in each term. Hold the others constant.
- Find the maximum and minimum of a function $$f$$ on the interval $$[a,b]$$ where $$f$$ is given by $$f(x)$$.
  - Find the solutions to $$f'(x)=0$$ and hence the stationary points of the function
  - Compare the values for $$f(a), f(b), f(x_{1}), f(x_{2})$$, and see which of these are the minimum or maximum values
- Sketch the graph of function $$f$$ given by $$f(x)$$
  - Find the stationary points and the values of $$f$$ at each of these.
  - Find the nature of each stationary point to determine if they are minima or maxima
  - Find the values of $$f(x)=0$$ if this is possible
  - Determine the behaviour of $$f(x)$$ as $$x \rightarrow \pm \infin $$
  - Investigate any possible asymptotes
- Show that $$f(x)=\frac{g(x)}{h(x)}$$ can be differentiated where $$h'(x)$$ is differentiable again with no reduction in the number of terms. You may also choose to use this rule when dealing with $$h(x) \rightarrow 0$$.
  - Use L'Hopital's Rule to calculate the limit of $$f'(x)$$; if both functions $$g(x)$$ and $$h(x)$$ are differentiable, then $$f'(x)=\frac{g'(x)}{h'(x)}$$. You can repeat this until you gain a value for a limit.
- Find $$\frac{dy}{dx}$$ in terms of $$x$$ and $$y$$ (implicit differentiation).
  - Implicit differentiation rules: for a function $$f(x)=g(x)h(y)$$, $$\frac{dy}{dx}f(x)=g'(x).(h'(x).\frac{dy}{dx})$$.
  - Essentially, differentiate $$g(x)h(y)$$ using the product/chain rule, and multiply the term $$h'(x)$$ by $$\frac{dy}{dx}$$.
- Show that $$\frac{d}{dx}f(x)= ...$$ where $$f(x)$$ is usually a function involving indices
  - Represent $$f(x)$$ as a form of $$e^{a log b}$$ (you will have to use some intuition here) and then differentiate the expression to achieve the expression on the right-hand side.
  - Note that for $$a>0, a^{x}=e^{xloga}$$. Note the rules for differentiating logarithms and differentiating the exponential function.

## Taylor's Theorem

### Quick definitions

The Taylor series can be defined as
$$
\sum^{\infin}_{n=0}\frac{f^{(n)}{(a)}}{n!}(x-a)^{n}
$$
Since we use Taylor's Theorem to calculate an approximation for a function, we will typically have a remainder left over, $$R_{n}(x)$$ where
$$
R_{n}(x)=\frac{f^{(n+1)}(c)}{(n+1)!}(x-a)^{n+1}
$$
for some number $$c$$ between $$a$$ and $$x$$. The **Taylor polynomial** refers to the polynomial expression derived after $$n$$ many expansions of the Taylor series.

When we pick $$a=0$$ for the Taylor series, we arrive at the Maclaurin series which is defined similarly:
$$
\sum^{\infin}_{n=0}\frac{f^{(n)}{(0)}}{n!}(x)^{n}
$$
We can still use the above expression for the remainder left by the approximation by substituting a value of $$0$$ for $$a$$. However, given by the squeeze rule, we will typically find that $$R_{n} \rightarrow 0$$ which shows that the Maclaurin series expansion is valid for all $$x \in \mathbf{R}$$. **Focus on the absolute value for $$R_{n}(x)$$**.

### Finding the estimate of the error

Using the above equations, once we have a polynomial from either the Maclaurin or Taylor series, we just need to pick our value for $$c$$; this is always a value between $$x$$ (the value we have been given) and $$a$$ , which is set to 0 by definition for the Maclaurin series. **You may need to do some rearranging to ensure that your value for $$c$$** is correct. 

**You should aim for** $$f^{(n+1)}(c)$$ **to be as large as possible** to get the largest possible absolute value for $$R_{n}(x)$$. Don't feel afraid to make arbitrary guesses for $$c$$ to ensure this. 

## First Order ODEs

- Find the general solution of $$\frac{dy}{dx}=f(x)g(y)=0$$.
  - This is a homogeneous separable equation and is solved by **taking integrals**.
  - Get $$dy, g(y)$$ onto one side of the equation and hence $$dx, f(x)$$ onto the other side of the equation. You will typically have a fraction of the form $$\frac{1}{h(y)}$$ and $$\frac{1}{k(x)}$$.
  - Once you have taken integrals of both sides you will end up with $$log(h(y))=m(x)+c$$ ; raise each to the power of $$e$$ and then simplify the expression.
  - **You may choose to introduce a variable $$vx=y$$** to help simplify an integral, as this will lead to a **separable equation**.
    - Remember to substitute the value of $$v$$ back into the expression.
- Solve the first order linear equation $$\frac{dy}{dx} + P(x)y = Q(x)$$. ***FOCUS ON THIS!!!!!!!***
  - Find the **integrating factor** $$I(x)=e^{P(x)dx}$$, such that $$yI(x)=1$$. Hence the derivative $$\frac{d}{dx}I(x)=I(x)P(x)$$.
  - **Multiply both sides** of the equation by the integrating factor $$I(x)$$.
  - Continue to solve the equation as you would using the above steps.

## Second Order ODEs

- Solve the homogeneous equation (find the general solution) of $$ay'' + by' + cy = 0$$.

  - Form the **auxiliary equation** $$a\lambda^{2} + b\lambda+c=0$$ and solve for $$\lambda$$.
    - Real and distinct roots; the general solution is $$y=Ae^{\lambda_{1}x}+Be^{\lambda_{2}x}$$.
    - Repeated roots; the general solution is $$y=(A+Bx)e^{\lambda x}$$.
    - Complex roots; the general solution is of the form $$y=e^{\alpha x}(A\cos\beta x+B\sin\beta x)$$, where $$\lambda_{1}=\alpha+i\beta$$ and $$\lambda_{2}=\alpha-i\beta$$ (the complex conjugate). Think: $$e^{real}(A\cos(imaginary .x) + B\sin(imaginary.x))$$.

- Solve the equation $$ay'' + by' + cy = f(x)$$, and for bonus points, solve for when $$y(m)=n$$ and $$y'(k)=l$$.

  - First, solve the **homogeneous equation** using the above steps, to find $$H(x)$$.

  - Next, find the **particular solution** using the following table (a solution for the equation $$y=P(x)$$:

  - | $$f(x)$$                        | form of particular solution for y                            |
    | ------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
    | $$e^{\alpha x}$$                  | $$y=Ae^{\alpha x}$$ if $$\alpha$$ is not a root of the auxiliary equation<br />$$y=Axe^{\alpha x}$$ if $$\alpha$$ is a non-repeated root<br />$$y=Ax^{2}e^{\alpha x}$$ if $$\alpha$$ is a repeated root |
    | polynomial of degree $$n$$        | polynomial of degree $$n$$ if 0 is not a root of the auxiliary equation<br />polynomial of degree $$n+1$$ if 0 is a *non-repeated* root<br />polynomial of degree $$n+2$$ if 0 is a *repeated root*<br />e.g. if you have $$f(x)=5x$$ then you can try $$y=Cx+D$$ which has degree 1. |
    | $$A\cos\alpha x + B\sin\alpha x$$ | **REMEMBER TO SUBSTITUTE A VALUE FOR $$\alpha$$**<br />$$y=C\cos\alpha x+D\sin\alpha x$$ if $$i\alpha$$ is **not** a root of the auxiliary equation<br />$$y=x(C\cos\alpha x+D\sin\alpha x)$$ otherwise |

  - Solve $$P(x)$$ to find out the values of the coefficients

  - Once you have an equation for $$y$$, then you can calculate $$y'$$ and $$y''$$ and **substitute these back into the equation at the start**. This is because the solution $$y=H(x)+P(x)$$

  - To work out a particular solution, then substitute the values for $$y$$ and $$y''$$ etc. to find out the values of $$A, B$$ from your homogeneous equation.
