---
layout: CS140
part: true
pre: part1
nex: part3
math: true
title: Authentication
---

# Why Authentication?

The general intention of computer security is to prevent unauthorised access and to ensure authorised users can access systems quickly.

> First step of control is to identify who a user is (Identification) and verify this identification (authentication)
>
> - Identification: Identity by username
> - Authentication: a process of verifying if the users are really who they claim they are

# Passwords

> A basic but very useful authentication method
>
> - invaluable first line of security defence
>
> - easy to use and implement


## The Problem with Passwords

- Weak passwords (People set weak passwords)
- People often repeat passwords for different accounts
- Even if people have good password habits, some sites store passwords in plaintext
- Some sites allow unlimited login attempts
- Some sites/systems don’t salt passwords – makes it easy to crack with computers.

### People's tendency in setting passwords

- According to one survey, 12% of employees used "password" as their password
- Password length is short 
- **1/4** of hashed passwords were cracked using a dictionary and combinations of the username. 
- Around 12% use dictionary words
- 81% use alphanumeric passwords

### User Overload

- On one hand, we should not set simple passwords but should set different passwords for different accounts
- On the other hand, we have many different accounts
  - Microsoft studied users' password behaviour
    - The average user has 25 password accounts
    - But the average user has 6.5 different passwords.

<blockquote class="extra" markdown="span">
    Edmund shared an <a href="https://xkcd.com/936/">XKCD</a> the other day that summarises the problem with passwords.
</blockquote>

# Password Cracking

The time taken to crack a password with brute force depends on the number of combinations,
$$
\text{Let length = L, and character set size = W} \\
Total \; Combinations= W^{L}
$$

| Password                 | Combinations (C)                             |
| ------------------------ | -------------------------------------------- |
| 26 characters - length 4 | 26<sup>4</sup> = 456,976                     |
| 52 characters - length 4 | 52<sup>4</sup> = 7.3 &times; 10<sup>6</sup>  |
| 94 characters - length 8 | 94<sup>8</sup> = 6.1 &times; 10<sup>15</sup> |
{:.centeredtable}

## Cracking Speed

Indicative speeds using current tools like **hashcat** or **John the Ripper**

| Hash   | Using              | Speed                       |
| ------ | ------------------ | --------------------------- |
| MD5    | Good PC            | 10<sup>7</sup> guess/second |
| SHA256 | Good PC            | 10<sup>6</sup> g/s          |
| MD5    | PC + Graphics Card | 10<sup>10</sup> g/s         |
| SHA256 | PC + Graphics Card | 10<sup>9</sup> g/s          |
{:.centeredtable}

With a GPU cluster, passwords can be cracked even faster – heavily depends on **hardware**.

Expected time to crack a password, $$Time = (Total\; Combinations)/Speed$$

## Password Strength

Often expressed as an entropy value, *x* – the number of bits needed to represent W<sup>L</sup>. 

Therefore, $$x = log_2W^L$$.

**Examples**: 

$$Entropy = 2 \times log_226 \approx 2 \times 4.7 = 9$$

$$Entropy = 4 \times log_252 \approx 4\times 5.7 = 22.8$$

### Human Generated Passwords

While entropy measures the “uncertainty” of a password - it is the maximum level of uncertainty. However, humans don’t choose random passwords; they use words or a pattern of characters - much less uncertainty in user-generated password. This leads to some reasons behind certain password cracking techniques like look-up tables, which we will look at in the next chapter. 

## Password Hashing

We should never store passwords in plaintext. Instead we store the hash:

- Hash is generated by a one-way hash function
- Hash function produces a fixed length hash value from the input
- Hashes are not meant to be reversible. Easy to compute f(x) but very hard to compute x from f(x). 
  - If the input changes by even a bit - the resulting hash should be completely different
  - Hash function types: MD5, SHA256, SHA512 etc...

# Other Authentication Methods

Passwords are just one way of providing authentication, what other methods are there?

**Biometrics.** Does not have a clear cut yes or no - there is room for false negatives or even false positives (which are worse).

Here are some statistics on the various  non-password authentication methods 

|               | False Pos | False Negative |
| ------------- | --------- | -------------- |
| Biometric     | 1%        | 10%            |
| Face          | 1%        | 0.1%           |
| Fingerprint   | 2%        | 0.1%           |
| Hand Geometry | 0.94%     | 0.99%          |
| Iris          | 0.0001%   | 0.2%           |
| Keystrokes    | 7%        | 0.1%           |
| Voices        | 2%        | 10%            |
{:.centeredtable}	